Note the new URL: http://www.exploits.org/nut/

Note the new program name: Network UPS Tools, aka NUT.

What's new in 0.42.0:

 - Variable control begins.  upsct2 and upsset.cgi are the command line
   and web interfaces, respectively.  This version is strictly read-only,
   and there are only variables of interest available when using the
   apcsmart driver.  To see what's available now, use one of the
   following:

   upsct2 <host>

   http://your.web.server/cgi-bin/ups/upsset.cgi?host=<host>

   Further improvements to this code will follow in this 0.42.x
   development series.

   For those of you keeping score, this means that the capabilities code
   from a *long* time ago (before 0.40.0) is back for good in the APC 
   driver.  More information on how this works can be found in the 
   new-modules.txt and protocol.txt files in the docs directory within
   the source tree.

 - "smartups" and "backupspro" drivers rolled into the "apcsmart" driver.
   This model attempts to figure out what can be used in the model it
   finds, and will report a "level" based on those findings.  Please
   include that information in any bug reports.  Trying to make this work
   on all these nutty older APC models is painful without it.

 - Also note that the previously depreciated behavior of upsd supporting
   state files on the command line has been totally removed.  You must now
   specify all state files with UPS lines in the upsd.conf.  upsd will
   let you know if you start it without any of those defined.

 - upsd can now have the state checking interval loosened with MAXAGE in
   the upsd.conf for those annoying models that can't keep up with a 15
   second freshness check.

 - Support for the Best Fortress models added with the "bestups" driver.
   Thanks to Bo Kersey of VirCIO for the development unit.

 - The Centralion CL-750 is now supported by the genericups driver as
   type 5.  Info provided by Neil Muller.

 - The UPSonic Lan Saver module has been removed since it is just a
   contact closure model.  It is now supported by the genericups driver
   as type 0.

 - multimon now understands more of the possible status keywords such
   as overload and replace battery.

 - This should be of interest to packagers - TEMPF or TEMPC in the
   multimon.conf will now set the default for the other fields, overriding
   the presence or absence of --enable-celsius.  This means you can
   compile a common binary and use the config file to switch scales.
   The choice is passed through to upsstats for proper readings there too.

   Expect the --enable-celsius option on configure to go away soon. 

Fixes and related changes:

 - The APC driver no longer does a shutdown+restore blindly, opting now to
   probe the line status and act properly from there.

 - The CGI routines and programs have been cleaned up a bit.

 - The dead code for "master" is gone from upsd and upsmon.  

 - Fixed an off by one bug in the fentonups driver that was breaking 
   battery percentage calculation.  Spotted by Mark Cooke.

 - Fixed some typos in the upsmon.conf and shutdown.txt spotted by
   Klaus Schallhorn.

What's next:

 - Another layer of security for authenticating "manager" users - those
   who will be able to use upsset.cgi to change R/W variables in the UPS.

 - Actually setting the values in the UPS via the model programs.

Way out there:

 - Well-rounded manager console incorporating variable setting and other
   "immediate commands" that make things happen in the UPS right away.
   Click a button, make a UPS that's 2000 miles away go BEEP, that sort of 
   thing.

For further details and things I may have missed, see the Changes file.
