What's new in 0.45.5:

Key features:

 - upsd and the drivers now do instant commands and variable set 
   commands over a socket in the STATEPATH.  The old SysV msg*()
   interface has been dropped.  This provides the same features as
   before, with the benefit of no longer needing that SysV interface.

   If your OS doesn't enforce permissions on sockets, you *MUST*
   lock down your state directory.  Otherwise, evildoers might be able
   to trick the UPS driver into running their commands.

   Your state directory (/var/state/ups or similar) should only be
   accessible by your UPS driver(s) and upsd.

   [oss-list-ups]

 - upsd.users no longer requires the ugly "repeat if you need more than
   5 args" hack.  Fixing this required changing the format of that file
   completely, so see the entry down in "interface changes" below.

Other new features:

 - You can now use 'configure --with-drivers=driver1[,driver2,...]'
   to specify which drivers get built and installed.  This means you
   no longer have to waste time and disk space with 30 drivers if
   you only need 1.

 - The mge-ellipse driver now supports user-selectable restart and
   shutdown delay values.	[Philippe Marzouk]

 - HP Powertrust hardware is now supported with the new hp driver.
   [Richard Muratti]

 - To accommodate the upsd.users changes noted elsewhere, the config
   file parser was replaced.  This new version allows the same tricks
   as before, plus you can now escape a newline to have a logical line
   that spans multiple physical lines if you really want to do that.

 - The bestups driver now bases the TRIM/BOOST status words on the
   outgoing voltage rather than the nominal voltage for better results.
   It also now reports the outgoing voltage to clients.	
   [Frank T. Lofaro Jr.]

 - The newvictron driver now reports the battery temperature and current.
   [Daniel Prynych]

 - PowerWare 5119 ("NetUPS") units are now supported by the genericups
   driver as type 15.

Interface changes:

 - The genericups driver has been converted to the new common core,
   which means you can use ups.conf and upsdrvctl.  This comes at the
   price of breaking the old command line arguments.  If you are using
   this driver, you must change your startup routines.

   Old way:                     genericups -t 2 /dev/ttyS0              

   New way without ups.conf:    genericups -x upstype=2 /dev/ttyS0

   Better way with ups.conf:    genericups -a myups

   Best way overall:            upsdrvctl start

   Here's what the ups.conf entry might look like now:

        [myups]
                driver = genericups
                port = /dev/ttyS0
                upstype = 2

   The -m/-M options to override the manufacturer and model strings
   are available as mfr= and model= either with -x or in ups.conf as
   usual.

 - upsd.users has changed formats.  It now resembles ups.conf with the
   sections in [brackets] and all directives using the form of
   "variable = value".  If you are using this file, you must convert it
   to the new style or upsd will not allow you to do any administration
   commands with upscmd/upsct2 or similar.

   See the upsd.users(5) man page, or the sample upsd.users file.

Bug fixes:

 - There was a situation where the slave upsmon could shut down due to
   a critical UPS and the master upsmon would never find out about it.
   This would leave the slave halted permanently, as the usual poweroff
   sequence would never execute on the UPS.

   This would happen if the UPS went to "OB LB" then back to "OL" or "OB"
   very quickly.  While this was happening, the slave would have to
   get a poll in, and then the status would change back before the master
   could poll.  This is a tight squeeze, but it actually happened once.

   Slave upsmon processes now wait up to HOSTSYNC seconds for the master
   to notice the situation and set the FSD (forced shutdown) flag.
   If the master doesn't respond after that time, they shut down anyway
   just in case the master is broken or otherwise unable to perform.
   [Philippe Marzouk]

 - upsfetch.o no longer requires symbols like upslogx().  This was 
   breaking compiles with third party programs that use this object
   file for network communications.

 - flock/lockf ifdef blocks were replaced with fcntl for portability
   and cleaner code in general.

 - upsd no longer says "ERR <upsname> UNKNOWN-UPS" in some situations,
   which is invalid according to the protocol and confuses the clients.

 - The MODELPATH directory is now created at install time.  Previously
   it wasn't, and this caused problems when installing the drivers
   in a separate path for packaging.	[Kevin Myers]

 - The newapc driver now flushes the input queue before sending a command
   to work around potential problems with unexpected characters arriving
   due to flaky UPS hardware.	[Nigel Metheringham]   

 - upsd now no longer fails to return "DATA-STALE" to a client for a
   UPS that has never been valid.  The fix for this changed the messages
   from upsd slightly, so it will no longer say "Data ... is now OK".
   All success messages from upsd about UPS acquisition will now be
   the original "Read data ... successfully".

 - The default value for FINALDELAY in upsmon is now 5 seconds.  This
   was changed from 15 seconds since it was conflicting with the HOSTSYNC 
   interval of 15 seconds in a master/slave environment.

   If you have manually set FINALDELAY in your upsmon.conf, you should
   make sure it's lower on the slaves than HOSTSYNC is on the master.

 - Blank status readings are no longer ignored by upsmon.  If this
   should happen due to a broken driver or similar, it will treat the
   situation as a UPS that has lost communications.

Ongoing:

 - This is it for the old style drivers.  If you're running one of them,
   you need to convert it or find someone to do it for you.

   An old style driver is one that can't use ups.conf and upsdrvctl.

   For more information, see this post:

	http://lists.exploits.org/upsdev/Mar2002/00006.html

Out there:

 - Establish a channel from the drivers back to the clients for
   reporting on instant commands

 - Fix newapc for old hardware and retire apcsmart

 - Document everything in the tree

 - Slap a 1.0 tag on this thing
