What's new in 0.43.2:

This release's focus:

 - Expanded features in upsset.cgi: instant commands

   This program now lets you invoke instant commands like starting a
   battery test through your web browser.  More of these commands will
   show up with coming releases, but the ones supported now should still
   be pretty useful.

Other new things:

 - The OFF command in the apcsmart driver must now be reissued after 3
   seconds but before 15 have elapsed.  This is mostly a safety catch
   to keep users from accidentally killing their systems remotely.

   This can be disabled if you like living on the edge.  See apcsmart.h.

 - IPT Anzen models are now supported by an experimental driver
   contributed by Travis Tabbal.  This bears a striking resemblance to
   the Opti-UPS protocol, so it may be extended to cover those units in
   the future.

 - APC's 940-0023A "share-ups" cable is now genericups type 9.  Pinout
   information and testing was contributed by Alissa Rogers.

 - Victron UPS models are now supported with a driver from Radek Benedikt.

 - The nut.spec file has been updated again to keep our Red Hat users 
   happy.  This update is courtesy of Andreas Piesk.

Bug fixes:

 - The apcsmart driver used to have a bogus status value for a second or
   two at startup.  Fixed.  A few other init-time issues like this were
   also cleaned up too.

 - CMD_OFF should now work predictably in the apcsmart driver thanks to
   an expanded delay between command characters.  

 - genericups type 1 is now only for the 940-0095A and C cables.
   The 940-0095B seems to be blind to the fact that anything has changed
   when the UPS reaches low battery no matter what lines you set.

   Meanwhile, type 1 was fixed so it doesn't read low battery all the
   time.  This bug was spotted and fixed by Jirka Chraska.

 - Capability detection code in the apcsmart driver no longer blindly
   assumes that each option will have 4 values.  Now it just increments
   the count as it finds them, which works a lot better on some of the
   more interesting models.

 - Contact closure models with a shutdown command of no lines set will no
   longer get a "missing shutdown flags" error when running the -k
   command.  The genericups driver can now tell the difference between
   "none" and "undefined" in that area.

 - Changing the UPS identity on older (read: slower) Matrix-UPS models
   should work now.  Those models should also now be recognized by the 
   apcsmart driver.

 - Various places have had call to strtok() thrown out to avoid 
   any "behind the scenes" effects that can happen when nesting occurs.

 - upsd has been cleaned up to reduce some common code into functions.
   You know, the sort of thing that makes CS profs happy.  This also
   made a few memory leaks stand out, and they were quickly squashed.

 - The CGI library parsing code no longer chokes on variables that are
   declared without any values in the query string.

 - Config files should now install to $(CONFPATH) instead of 
   $(BASEPATH)/etc - an error that crept in during the change to BSD
   install in the previous release.  Fixed by Luca Filipozzi.

What's next:

 - upsmon gets a long awaited overhaul.  Multiple power supplies and 
   early (timed) shutdowns are just two of the things planned for it.
   This is the next sub-project, so the versions will now be 0.44.x.

Out there:

 - My list of sub-projects has hit the bottom at long last.  Other
   features will be considered, but after upsmon is overhauled, changes
   will be a lot smaller.  Then the march to an eventual 1.0 release will
   begin once all the planned features are complete.
